---
author: david-weinberger
date: 2010-07-29 14:22:17+00:00
slug: '327'
title: Computer-assisted human curation
wordpress_id: 327
tags:
- ai
- curation
---

[Paul Gillin blogs](http://gillin.com/blog/2010/07/content-curation-on-steroids/) about [CIThread](http://www.cithread.com/site/node) (while disclosing that he is advising them):

> The curator starts by presenting the engine with a basic set of keywords. CIThread scours the Web for relevant content, much like a search engine does. Then the curator combs through the results to make decisions about what to publish, what to promote and what to throw away.
>
> As those decisions are made, the engine analyzes the content to identify patterns. It then applies that learning to delivering a better quality of source content. Connections to popular content management systems make it possible to automatically publish content to a website and even syndicate it to Twitter and Facebook without leaving the CIThread dashboard.
>
> There's intelligence on the front end, too. CIThread can also tie in to Web analytics engines to fold audience behavior into its decision-making. For example, it can analyze content that generates a lot of views or clicks and deliver more source material just like it to the curator. All of these factors can be weighted and varied via a dashboard.

I haven't seen the software so I don't know anything about the actual implementation, but providing ever more clever computer assistance to human curators sounds like an inevitably useful path.
