---
published: false
author: Craig
date: 2010-03-23 16:20:00+00:00
slug: tags-tools
title: Tags & Tools
wordpress_id: 280
categories:
- Ideas
tags:
- tags cataloging reference plug-in incentive review enrich search guides
---

**Reference Interaction Resource Tagging**--- How do we gather reference interaction data into a coherent and searchable form?  Right now, Reference librarians are generating access paths to information, but those paths frequently disappear when the interaction that spawned them ends.  If enough of a type of question occurs, a research guide is generated by the librarians, but these resources aren't as dynamic and searchable as they could be.  Perhaps the answer is interaction tagging.  Rather than having librarians record each interaction, they could generate a series of tags to describe the question and then link those to the sites they visit (via browser history?) A firefox plug-in that contained this history+tags combination could capture the vast majority of reference interactions.  The frequency of the interactions and the tag set could help us prioritize resources and visualize new areas of research as they become popular.  Now if those tags linked into the research guides (perhaps resource use ranking ) and were made searchable (say with a search bar on the library main page), students could rapidly access ranked, tagged, and professionally vetted resources.  The resource guides are a hugely valuable intellectual resource that too few members of the Harvard community utilize.

**LCSH Catalogers Tool**--- Another path to tag enrichment of catalog data.  Catalogers are experts in determining the "aboutness" of materials.  However, the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) is restrictive and lots of information falls by the wayside. What if we could develop a tool that could help catalogers generate LC subjects and at the same time create a seed pool of tags?  Picture a cataloger getting to the 650 field (that's where subjects live) and clicking on a tool that would take their tags/notes on the aboutness of the book, run them through a thesaurus, and pull up a series of applicable subject headings than can then be clicked on to place them into the proper fields. Macros have already found integration into Cataloging, so they're open to new tools that make the work easier/faster.  Then we take the tags generated and use them as seeds for the tag cloud/information reef we hope to form around each record.  We generate better search results in ShelfLife and what comes beyond, the catalogers generate subjects much faster (which could lend itself to more subjects per item), and our patrons get a better sense of what each item is about.

**Incentivized tagging/reviews**--- What if, a patron could check into their ShelfLife/Hollis account and tag & review the materials they've checked out.  Provide them with fields for class or personal, research or interest, and possibly a suggestion set based on popular tags for the resource and let them do the work of generating an enriched data set for items they've come in contact with.  Put some sort of weeder on the tag option so a certain critical mass of people (2 or 3 for starters) must tag an item the same way to get the tag accepted.  The most prolific taggers can get a free t-shirt or a thumb drive after hitting a certain threshold of input.  Maybe provide a ranking bar on the right side of the page to see which users are the most prolific and goad others into participating?  Incentivizing tagging would allow us to organically expand the richness of the catalog at a good pace and if the incentives are automated (ranking or perhaps crimson cash deposits) we can keep patrons tagging and reviewing year-on-year with very little staff time needed to keep the ball rolling.

My thought is, we don't have to have perfect, fully enriched information right away.  If we provide the seeds and proper boundary conditions, we can create growth that will enrich our offerings over time.

Ideas from our meeting - 03/23/10
